Plasma Youth Sports Games
with Unsuccess of the champion,
would like to thank Slaven Bilić
for stepping in as the host.
Bilić is one of the first sponsors,
ambassador and is our biggest promoter.
He used his life and sports experience
in order to prepare high-quality content
with his guests for all generations.
Thanks, Nane!
So, Novak Đoković.
The best tennis player in history.
And generally, one of the greatest
athletes of this millennium.
It is a great pleasure to have you
as a guest on our show.
On behalf of our entire team,
I would like to thank you
for taking the time
to be a guest on our show.
Thank you.
Thank you for coming.
I like to start the show
with current events.
We had the opportunity to read
that you terminated your
cooperation with Andy Murray.
-That's right. -What we...
You’ve said that at the beginning
of every year, you set your priorities
and goals for the upcoming season.
You’ve also mentioned being
aware of your age.
In advance, happy 38th birthday.
Thank you. -Which you’ll
celebrate in a few days.
You’ve said that this season you’d like
to enjoy the fruits of your labor
and find some balance between that
and the ultimate drive to win.
Is that possible? -I still don’t have
an answer to that question.
But I'm on the path to finding that out.
For me, the state I’m currently
in is somewhat new,
considering that, as you mentioned,
I’ve always had and strived for clarity.
In terms of setting goals, ambitions,
and knowing what I want to achieve.
And I think that has helped me a lot
and the people around me as well
in terms of organization
and simply in life overall.
And in directing energy towards
what is a priority and most important.
Tennis has been the primary thing
in my life for three decades.
It’s what I know best in life.
It’s what I do best.
When I became a parent
ten years ago, things changed.
For the better.
I gained a new dose of motivation.
I felt an even greater desire
to make my son happy,
my wife, and of course
my parents always.
But when I became a father,
it moved into a whole new dimension.
I used that momentum -
I'm referring to my results.
It gave me wings, and after that,
I had a few fantastic years.
And then I got injured and went
through different phases, etc.
2018 was a key and decisive year
when I even considered stepping away
from tennis for a while, but then
I came back and became number one.
But those phases both in life
and career that I went through were
very interesting, and that’s the approach
I take to this current time as well.
I see it as just another phase.
Which is an integral part of my life.
I’m putting aside the fact that I’m
a successful tennis player and athlete.
And everything I’ve been
through as a professional.
I see myself as a person
who has the same challenges, joys,
and also problems as other people.
Here, I’m talking about emotions,
not the material side of things.
I understand you. -If we’re
talking about material things,
I’m quite privileged,
and I’m grateful to God for that.
But all of us, each in our own way,
have certain challenges
we must face sooner or later.
I’ve often, figuratively speaking,
pushed those challenges aside
I mean the personal, private-life ones.
I’ve often suppressed and postponed them.
Because you’ll understand this -
when a match is coming up,
when an important part
of the season is ahead,
you have to be in quarantine,
isolation, focused, prepared, dedicated.
And just because you put something off
doesn’t mean it stays at the same intensity
as when you first pushed it aside.
It grows stronger by
the time you revisit it.
Of course. -And that’s how some of those
problems and challenges happened to me.
Over time, in a kind of cascade.
And because of that, sooner or later,
you end up paying the price
though that may be too strong a phrase.
You simply have to deal with
your life, and I’ve had an incredible
system of people around me.
As I still do today.
For so many years from my wife,
my parents, my tennis team,
professional staff, marketing
team, friends, and so on.
I think I’ve been somewhat
cocooned. -Protected.
I have several protective layers
that allow me to do what I do
in the best possible way.
And people around me
shield me from a lot of things.
But eventually, all of that
reaches a point where...
Okay, when it comes to tennis,
I still have a strong desire,
I’m still here as a competitor.
You asked me whether
I’m managing to find balance.
I’m searching for it to such
an extent that tennis is no longer,
to a large degree, my top priority.
I want to be a father.
I want to be a husband.
I want to make up for something
I've sacrificed because I truly have.
Maybe that’s a harsh word,
but for many years,
I’ve made sacrifices.
Now I feel like I want to live life.
And to find, for myself,
as much as possible...
I don’t know how possible that is,
or what’s really possible.
I’m on the path to discovering
that optimal balance.
To still do what I love,
but also to be...
I'll answer that in one of
your next questions.
I’m not the kind of person who can
play tennis - meaning professionally -
I love playing it recreationally
with friends and with my kids.
But to compete professionally,
to play just for the sake of playing.
I can’t do that.
-I understand you.
I have to play and still feel like
I’m at that level where I could
potentially win a Grand Slam
and be one of the best.
If that’s no longer the case,
I promised myself that would be the end.
But you... You say it yourself
and I asked you about that balance.
You say you’re not trained
to do anything at 99%.
Only at 100%.
Is that shift the reason? -Yes.
Is that the reason the results
aren’t what you,
and we, and everyone else
have come to expect?
People ask themselves
and that's a good question.
They think I don't train enough.
You could pose the question
that way, but that’s not the truth.
I don’t think I’ve changed the intensity
or commitment to training.
I believe that part has stayed
if not the same, then very close.
I think it’s simply that I’ve made
room for other things in my focus.
It sounds harsh to refer
to family as "things". -No.
What I mean is, anyone who competes
at the highest level in professional sports
and you can understand this,
only athletes can truly understand this.
Maybe most people don’t
understand what I’m trying to say.
But that level of commitment
you can even call it obsessive,
you have to have it, especially
in individual sports like ours.
There’s no substitution,
no postponing... -No passing the ball.
You’re either present or not.
You either win or you don’t.
If something goes wrong, you take
full responsibility, and that’s it.
That kind of obsessive dedication
that consumed my life 24/7,
I lived with it for decades.
By the end of 2023, which was
one of my best seasons.
Of course, we all make mistakes,
but I try to live my life without regret.
Because I believe that everything
happens for a reason.
Still, there are moments when you
think maybe I could’ve done this
a little differently.
I think that happened in 2023,
after such a successful season.
Which was very long and crowned
with three Grand Slam titles.
Crowned with being world number
one at the age of 35, and so on.
I also won awards for best athlete,
and everything was beautiful.
But then I simply rushed
too quickly into a new season.
In tennis, for example I don’t know
how many people know this,
but tennis currently has the longest
season of all global sports.
There’s no break.
The season officially starts
on January 1st, or even December 30th,
and runs until the end of November.
That basically means,
if you play the full season
which I’m not doing right now.
Most of the guys
and girls are playing it.
For the men, the season is even
longer than for the women.
They play and only have
about one month total
for rest and preparation
for the next season.
I committed too early to playing
the start of the 2024 season.
At that time, I was training
with Goran Ivanišević.
He was my coach.
I remember he didn’t agree
with that decision.
He wanted me to play something
right before the Australian Open
at the beginning of 2024
but considering how intense
the end of my season was,
he was right.
I think it would have been better
if I had rested, started training again,
and then gone straight there.
Played one or two warm-up matches
and gone directly to the Grand Slam.
But I chose to play
at the United Cup.
I played for the Serbian national team.
We rarely get the opportunity
to participate in team tournaments.
Our biggest is the Davis Cup.
Then we have the United Cup, etc.
It was interesting for me to go there
because of the camaraderie and atmosphere.
I’ve always missed that team spirit.
However, it was too much.
We played the first match
on December 30th.
And I had finished the previous
season on December 1st.
I had less than four weeks
to rest and prepare.
That’s one example of a decision
I could’ve made differently.
But I didn’t. It’s okay.
It happened for a reason.
And then came the burnout.
I didn’t have time to rest and recharge.
I immediately jumped
into another Grand Slam.
I reached the semifinals
and lost to Jannik Sinner.
That day, I was only
physically present on the court.
Physically there, but mentally
completely absent.
After that, I realized
I had no more energy.
Not just for that tournament,
but more broadly.
I kept playing afterward,
trying to find myself again.
I thought after playing one or two
tournaments I’d get into form.
Then I started finding myself
in other things as well business,
and some other activities
where I feel more fulfillment
while doing them. Then I asked
myself a question, and I still ask it:
Have I earned the right to ask myself
why do I continue doing this?
And do I still find joy and
satisfaction in doing what I do?
After everything I’ve accomplished.
History will always be there.
There’s always a plan: "Just this next
tournament, then that one."
A historical stat, I’ll break one more
record my own or someone else’s.
That will always be there.
And thank God I’ve
put myself in that position.
But what’s the purpose?
Because if I don’t enjoy being
on the court and we can’t
always enjoy it
you know how it is.
You struggle every day,
you don’t want to get out of bed,
but you force yourself
to train, run, and so on.
Do I still find fulfillment
in doing this?
Do I still push myself
through each season?
Am I forcing myself to do this,
or am I doing it because deep down,
I feel passion and love
for competition?
That’s the real philosophy.
That’s the issue with modern
professional sports - especially
the ones where a lot of money
is involved.
In football, for example,
they play over 80 matches a year.
The season has been
extended massively.
Now they’ve invented
the Club World Cup,
and players won’t even
have time to rest or prepare.
That’s a problem for everyone because
it’s all become too big a business.
We’ll talk more about that later.
Even though a lot has already been said,
let’s go back to the early ’90s
to that famous meeting
with Jelena Genčić.
You were 4.5 years old,
and you were on Mount Kopaonik.
You come from a sporting family.
But your father always said
you preferred skiing.
-That’s right.
So where did your love
for tennis come from?
Destiny. I don’t know
how else to explain it.
I was four years old.
We grew up in Belgrade.
I have two younger brothers.
And we spent a lot of time
on Mount Kopaonik,
which is in southern Serbia,
because that’s where my parents met
and started their hospitality business,
which we lived off.
They also had some work in Belgrade,
but it wasn’t as financially stable
as the income from
the restaurant on Kopaonik.
But even that business was seasonal.
Sometimes, during the war-torn ’90s,
the seasons were actually better
than in the early 2000s.
And at that time,
because of the foreigners,
and the long winters and summers,
it was possible to make a living from it.
And, well, by chance, although
I don't believe in coincidences,
but let's just say it was fate,
life arranged it in such a way
that three tennis courts
were being built near the restaurant.
I mean, just 50 meters away.
Up until then, I think my father had
watched maybe three matches in his life.
He watched those legends who used to
play back then, and that was it.
He watched Borg, McEnroe,
Becker, and that was it.
But he had no real contact with tennis,
neither he nor my mother.
My mom graduated from
the sports faculty here in Belgrade,
and my father was a professional
football player for a while,
but he mostly focused on skiing.
Then he became a skiing instructor,
and that's how they met. She had fallen
on the slope, and he came to help,
so he said: "You need an instructor,"
and little by little, I showed up after
9 months. But it's an interesting story,
and that mountain, Kopaonik,
is very special to all of us.
And I was just a kid, of course curious.
I must have been four or five years old.
It was 1992 and I was watching
them build the courts,
bringing the workers beer
from the restaurant,
and they let me mix a bit of plaster.
It was interesting to me.
When they finished building everything,
the first tennis camp started. I joined.
Jelena Genčić wasn't there
at that camp, she came later.
In that first camp, there were
a lot of kids. It was summer.
My parents asked
if I could play there, and I did.
That's when the first video was made,
with the colorful racket
and the tongue sticking out,
and that was my first backhand.
Then, not long after, Jelena Genčić
came, maybe later that summer,
and I spent a bit of time with her.
And that's when I started playing
tennis, in camps, for 2 or 3 years.
I instantly fell in love with it.
I asked my dad if he could buy me
a racket, and he bought me soft balls
and a small racket,
and I was hitting the wall all day.
And of course,
I was watching matches...
My first exposure to a tennis match on
TV was in 1992, the final with Sampras.
I can't quite remember exactly
who he beat in the final,
but it was his first Wimbledon win. And
that's when I said: "This is my idol."
It was probably because he was
the first one I saw, and I liked it.
Even though my game and style
are completely different from his.
So, I started playing and it
became a continuous thing.
However, I was so young and small.
At the time I also skied, played
football, started school, and so on.
It wasn't really yet professional.
Then there was Jelena Genčić...
She was known in the former Yugoslavia
for her extraordinary eye for talent.
Maybe there were a few people
like that: Niki Pilić, Jelena Genčić...
Did she discover
Monika Seleš as well?
Yes, Monika Seleš, who lived and grew up
in Novi Sad, and then moved to America.
Jelena also worked with her.
I knew everything about Monika,
when she ate, slept, what she did,
what she listened to, what she read...
So, for me, Monika was my first
real idol, my role model, so to speak.
I felt closer to her because
she worked with Jelena.
And then, Jelena would take me
to her house. My parents allowed it,
they collaborated with Jelena,
who I like to call my "tennis mother".
I was around 8 or 9 years old.
We would go to her house,
listen to classical music,
read poetry, watch...
We did visualization exercises that she
didn't call "visualization" back then.
The same visualization
that's famous today.
You close your eyes, visualize what you
want, and believe it will come true.
She told me:
"Just close your eyes."
We would watch videos of players like
Edberg, Becker, Agassi, Sampras, Goran,
Monika, Capriati,
Steffi Graf, and so on...
We would watch them,
and then she'd ask me:
"Alright, you just watched Becker.
What did you see in his game?"
I was nine years old. I'd tell her:
"He had an outstanding serve."
She'd say: "Yes, an excellent serve. But
what exactly did you see in the serve?"
And then she'd provoke me
to say exactly what I saw,
whether it was precision,
power, spin, position, whatever...
She'd provoke me like that,
and in doing so, she taught me
to watch tennis professionally,
to see it the way it should be seen,
so I could absorb all those elements
and then apply them to my game.
And that's where the imitations came
from in the first part of my career.
I imitated each of them, because I
became so immersed in it all
that I really wanted to have Agassi's
return, Becker's serve, Goran's serve,
Goran's racket breaking,
or whatever it was...
Yes... And you know what is fascinating
here? Correct me if I'm wrong...
The woman you're talking about,
the one you call your tennis mother.
From a coach's perspective,
her methods are fascinating to me.
All of these... You yourself said
that a child has to dream. -Yes.
Classical music, poetry, languages...
How will you approach the queen?
Not if you win, but when you win
Wimbledon. Raising cardboard trophies...
To me, that's... You know, these phrases
today, and in the last 20 years,
"'nothing is impossible", "the sky's
the limit", "breaking barriers",
you guys were doing all of that through
play because you were training for it.
She trained you, your dreams.
Not "if something happens",
but "when it happens".
When you win Wimbledon, you have to
dress this way, you have to say this...
When the queen arrives,
you have to do this...
That's incredible! A method
for the chosen ones, for champions.
It's not for everyone,
of course, because it's not...
Yes, and that's exactly
what stands out.
She had that eye,
she could see in me not just talent,
but the qualities,
exactly what you explained,
that I could hear it, realize it, take
it in, adopt it, and apply it tomorrow.
And that I truly believed in it, that it
wasn't just something I did because
an authority figure, whether
it was a parent or coach-told me to,
but because I believed in it with every
part of myself, with every cell,
and that would shape my future.
Now, your story sounds like a movie,
as if everything went by smoothly.
But it was the early '90s, a time of
war, later sanctions against Serbia,
and other issues that were present.
Then comes a woman
who tells your parents,
while you're just four and a half
years old, that your son has talent,
that it's a gift from the heavens, and
that your son will be in the top ten
by the time he is 17 years old.
You said your parents
didn't only have financial problems...
For someone who knew nothing about this,
who didn't know who to pick out...
Your father was the provider,
the one who provides for the family.
But at that time, it was an individual
sport, an expensive sport.
Objectively, your father
lacked the logistics.
For all of us, our fathers are the ones
who took us to our first training,
to our first match, but for you,
he probably also had the role
of agent in the beginning,
part-coach, and so on...
It's a complex relationship
between you and him,
which later, once you're recognized
and experts step into those roles,
returns to that father-son dynamic.
That's difficult. It's complex.
Well, it's complex, you know...
I mean, if we had known at that time
that all of this would happen,
and that everything would be achieved,
I think we would have,
of course, agreed to it.
It's what both he and I
desperately wanted.
And of course, my mother, who wasn't
at the front lines in that sense,
but she was the one who held the family
together. -You say she was the pillar.
She was the pillar, without her,
it would have been complete chaos.
She held us 4 men together, my 2 younger
brothers and of course, my father.
Everyone was into sports, changing
a lot of clothes, went to school,
she had to clean a lot
and prepare things for us.
I mean, a lot of women do that,
thank God, but on the other hand,
most of them have a lot of difficulties
keeping the family together
while allowing the men in the house,
like in her case, to live
their dreams outside the home.
Because of that, I have to mention
my mother as the pillar of the family,
and my father as the driving force. He
was the energy I needed at that moment
because there were a few moments
early in my life where I was uncertain
about whether tennis was the right
choice. I loved skiing a lot.
And of course, as a son and a little
boy, you look up to your father...
Your father is your first role model,
the first example of what
you want to be in life.
When I looked at videos
and pictures of him skiing,
or of the times when he taught me to
ski, I naturally wanted to be like him.
Why wouldn't I want to be like my dad?
And of course, he wanted to support me,
in anything, but he gave me a choice.
Both he and my mom
gave me the choice.
I remember those moments as very
defining, very prominent in my life.
I was about ten years old,
we were in Belgrade.
Since we had changed apartments so many
times during that time in the late '90s,
along with the bombing,
we didn't have a permanent home.
And there were a lot of difficulties
for them, as you mentioned.
Tennis was an incredibly
expensive sport.
It still is today, and especially
back then. They simply...
I remember my dad putting
10 Marks on the table and saying,
"This is all we have."
At that moment, something inside me
awakened, that fatherly instinct in me,
that I had to grow up at 12 years old.
I simply understood his message.
But despite everything, he was ready to
do whatever it took to support me, 100%,
and said: "We'll find the money,
we'll create the conditions,
we'll figure it out. If there's no clear
path right now, we'll make one.
You just have to tell me,
are you ready for this?
Do you fully want to dedicate
yourself to this?"
For a ten-year-old, that was
a huge thing. -For a kid...
I wanted to play, I loved skiing,
I loved football, and I loved tennis.
And then, I think in the end,
the choice was the right one.
I mean, definitely... And full of fate.
But at that moment, it was a little...
He said: "Son, sleep on it, think
about it. If tomorrow, in your heart,
you feel that tennis is the one,
we'll go for it."
So, I'm here, we're all going together?
-We're all going together.
That's incredible. And you've already
mentioned your mother as the pillar.
So, a woman who, just like the
relationship between you and your dad,
which isn't just father and son,
has to make sure that
the most important relationship
isn't lost, and at the same time,
you have, as you said,
two younger brothers?
All of that has to be managed,
without any script.
They didn't know anything. Back then,
there wasn't even a film about this,
where you could see that
this is how things would unfold,
how other fathers did things.
It was all new, with so many challenges,
so many unpredictable difficulties,
making it easy to fall into problems.
Did you, and I asked Goran this as well,
since he comes from the same sport,
did you ever feel that you
just had to succeed? -Yes.
You had to, because of the future,
the existence... -100%.
It's not about
"Do we want to go on vacation?"
or "Do we want to afford some luxury?"
It's the existence of the whole family,
not just yours. -100%.
It all depends on you. And that's
incredibly hard for a child.
100%, as you said. That's absolutely how
it was. That's what I mentioned earlier,
when I was 12, and that scene
happened with those 10 Marks,
that was when I really woke up,
"OK, this is it". -At 12, you grew up...
I had to grow up, skip six years,
and become an adult.
I had to take responsibility,
help out at home wherever I could,
within our little family ecosystem,
figuring out how I could contribute.
I realized that my role, at that moment,
was to take care of my younger brothers,
which felt logical and natural.
That was the first thing.
The second thing, the bigger
and more challenging part
that would bring results in the future,
but we didn't know this at the time,
was that I had to fully dedicate
myself to my tennis life.
When I say "tennis life", I don't
just mean tennis training and such,
but everything I did had to be
absolutely dedicated to that.
And what was remarkable
and helped me a lot,
though it was very hard
and challenging,
was that all family members devoted
themselves to my tennis life.
That hurts my father and mother,
but also my two younger brothers
where neglected,
especially the middle brother.
The youngest showed it,
he played tennis six hours a day.
Both were talented.
Our parents lacked strength.
At that time, as it was,
no money, no resources...
This is absolutely not a critique.
No, it's just the truth,
and they themselves know
and admit it, and so on.
It was a tough reality
for both my brothers,
especially my middle brother Marko.
He's still in tennis,
he's also doing other things,
but he's still a tennis coach.
That's how much he loves it.
The youngest isn't.
He's in other areas,
but Marko really loves tennis.
He always wanted to succeed.
Even though being Novak’s brothers
brought them some privileges,
they also lived in the shadow.
When you live in the shadow...
Good thing you're the eldest brother.
-Yes. -You're their idol.
My older brother was my idol too.
Is it the same in other sports?
Parents have to support
and give things up.
But in tennis it can go
to the edge of survival.
That's how it was for Goran,
for example.
Have you talked to legends from other
countries? Is it the same there?
Of course support is needed,
like with Nadal, for instance.
A teammate pushes you forward.
Is it easier to afford that
in other countries?
You mean in tennis,
for colleagues in the sport?
Yes, but not to this extent.
You mentioned Nadal,
he comes from Spain,
a country with big tennis tradition,
a strong tennis federation.
They have a broad system,
even the smallest village
has access to tennis courts.
Tennis is a national sport there.
That’s why they’ve produced
so many great players.
Much respect for that.
Then there’s France, and so on.
Tennis is a Western sport.
It began on French courts
in the 16th century,
and became more professional
in late 19th century England.
It then spread from there.
It was always a sport of the elite,
the "white" sport, as they say.
That’s why most top players
come from such countries.
When small nations show up,
people ask, what are these guys
from Serbia or Croatia doing here?
Who are they, what are they?
It bothers some people.
You can feel it.
Not just in tennis,
but in other sports too.
But tennis is what I know best.
At 12, you went to Munich,
to Niki Pilić, right? -Yes.
But I wanted to ask,
along with Munich and Kopaonik,
you had a normal childhood, right?
You had your neighborhood.
You often mention your grandfather
as an important figure.
You had friends,
you went to school.
Only in high school, as your mom said,
there was no understanding for your sport.
But you had your group,
your neighborhood, your court.
How did you handle puberty
and adolescence?
The good and the bad?
Like staying out late,
falling in love, cigarettes, alcohol?
I think I mostly skipped that.
Both luckily and unluckily. -Yes.
Luckily, it gave me a clean,
clear path toward my goal.
It wasn’t hard for me
to give those things up.
I didn’t even see it as sacrifice.
This was just what I wanted.
Through tennis I had
my circle, my community,
but not to the extent most kids had.
Yes, I missed a lot,
as anyone does who...
...chooses a pro sports career
in their teenage years, when you are
already labeled as ultra-talented
and seen as a big prospect.
So at 12 and a half, nearly 13,
I went to Niki. At that time, Niki's academy
didn’t accept anyone under 14.
It was one of the top 2 or 3
academies in Europe, top 5 in the world.
Jelena Genčić was close with Niki.
They knew each other well,
they were friends and collaborators.
One day, Jelena told my parents,
she had given all she could,
shared all her knowledge.
She said I was ready
for a new chapter,
that it was time to find
a new team, coach, environment.
That says a lot about
who she was as a person.
You know, in coaching, how hard it is...
I was never a coach,
but hope to get to know that someday.
Still, from my view,
it’s very hard to step away
from a super talented kid and say,
"I’ve done enough."
That’s a big step
for anyone’s ego and pride.
To say, "Go to someone else,
I’ve given you what I can."
That’s a huge thing. It speaks to
her humility and her character.
She called Niki and said,
I know you don’t take kids under 14,
but this kid is special.
Please, take him for a week or two.
See what he's like, feel him out.
If you think he’s not good enough
or not mature enough, send him back.
But try it. -I believe he's the one.
Both Niki and Jelena
highlight your approach.
Niki says Novak never forgets
anything I told him.
Jelena says the same
about your mindset.
How do you remember Pilić,
who raised you back then?
Before I answer that, I just want to
mention the moment that was crucial,
that shaped my life
and my family's life.
That was when I was 12 and a half,
during the bombing,
when they put 10 Marks on the table.
I think that’s when I realized
I had to grow up in that moment,
take responsibility,
and accept nothing but success.
Like you said, and that’s 100% true.
In my head, I felt a clear message
to myself, probably from above too,
but also from those around me:
It’s on you now.
Of course I’d have support, but it was
on me to devote all my energy to it.
And if I did that, I deeply felt
success was guaranteed.
Of course, nothing in life is 100%,
but when you just feel it...
To answer your question,
that mindset we spoke of,
I think that moment shaped my mindset,
my ability to absorb and adopt.
Like my father says:
you have to breathe, eat, drink tennis.
That’s how I lived for many years.
Especially during those teenage years.
There was nothing else. Just that.
That unusual, extreme dedication.
When I went to Niki, I was fully aware
of what I’d just said,
that Niki was a legend, that his academy
was one of the best worldwide,
that Goran, Becker,
and others came there,
that very few players
had access at all.
I know Jelena Genčić used up
her favor just to call him.
That means, looking back now,
use the chance.
No one had to say it. It was clear.
-But you were 12. -You know, yes,
but I was forced to mature fast.
-That’s why you’re Đoković. -Yes,
but when I came, I...
I did feel a bit more pressure,
in terms of expectations,
but I also couldn’t wait
to change my environment.
There was war here, bombs falling,
so many horrible things.
As much as I love my country,
I wanted a change.
To see if that would inspire me,
give me new motivation, a push forward.
I went to a fantastic place,
the best possible one for me then.
Jelena was completely right.
Niki’s wife Mia and Niki himself
accepted me like a son.
I’m grateful to them
until the grave, as they say.
Not because I was theirs,
or from their region... I don’t know.
There were others like me. A few
Croats, some from Serbia, but very few.
Most were foreigners.
They just... I tried to be everything
my parents raised me to be:
a polite boy, normal, humble,
hardworking, there with a purpose.
To value everything I was given
or allowed to do.
And when I got the chancem
to show myself. Then that chance came.
I played, Niki watched me.
Niki was, how to say,
a busy man at the time.
Everyone wanted his attention.
Everyone hoped he’d give
them five minutes.
He came and went.
Then Goran came.
Goran was preparing for his
champion run at Wimbledon in 2001.
I think that moment defined things...
Niki had already accepted me.
I’d been training there a while.
He already saw me
as talented, and so on.
But I think, when he saw
how I handled Goran on court,
what I did, he said: this kid really
has something, a spark, a switch,
that’s different. Not just talent,
but champion mentality.
A little different from the others.
-You didn’t miss a shot...
Not a single shot against Goran.
-That’s impossible.
I entered some kind of zone,
an out-of-body experience with Goran,
who was, of course, my childhood idol.
When he showed up, I was drooling.
Then I asked Niki, can I...
Whenever he's on the court,
I'm there, just to watch.
He says OK, asked Goran.
He said sure. I sat there.
I said, Goran, can we play?
We played. Then he...
That was interesting to me.
At that moment I really didn’t plan it.
But it comes from Jelena Genčić,
what I just did. So, he runs...
Jelena Genčić always warned me
to stretch before and after,
to warm up properly. That I had to
carry not just a spare shirt,
underwear, socks, a towel,
but also a banana, Bonžita,
or something sweet to have with me.
To eat right away and replenish
what I lost, then go for lunch
and everything else.
You need enough water,
to calculate how much to sip,
how much to save.
I knew all that at nine years old.
Everything was by the book.
And then, I watch Goran
running after practice.
I think, Goran came to train,
I saw him in the gym,
didn’t see him eat anything there.
He played tennis, finished training,
it lasted an hour and a half, two,
I don’t know. I didn’t see him eat anything.
He drank. Played with me, now runs,
and while he waits for food
to be served at the restaurant,
I'll bring him a Bonžita.
I grab mine and run to him.
A kid, I was 13-14 years old,
I run to Goran. Even though we played,
there were 20 kids there,
what can I tell Goran,
that he needs to watch his nutrition?
But I dared, and said:
"Goran, please, you haven’t eaten."
"Take this, it’s good." He laughed
and said, "Alright, kid, fine."
Then he told Niki, this little guy,
he brought me Bonžita.
Those are the moments that...
I remember them with great joy
and happiness in my heart.
Every moment I spent at Pilić's
academy was perfect for me.
Between ages 12 and 16,
I spent a lot of time there.
Often, at times, I was maybe even alone
at the academy, when it was struggling
and there weren’t many players.
I stayed out of gratitude
toward Niki and everything he did.
I don’t know, Niki is my tennis father.
If Jelena Genčić is the mother,
he is the father. -You said that,
but you also placed on yourself...
Niki Pilić said, he mentions your winning
your first Challenger in Aachen,
2004, right? -Yes.
You won eight matches.
Three in qualifications and five more.
Your father arrives... The prize
was about 7,500 dollars.
Your father arrives and says:
"Congrats, Nole." You say: "Dad,
we agreed on when
you'd congratulate me."
That is... -Yes. -That’s the goal,
and all these are...
Stops along the way.
-Stops along the way, but...
Your success isn't sudden,
because you were already
a triple European champion
at the age of 14.
However, as you yourself say,
and it's true,
I know it from many examples,
things have to open up for you,
you have to have a bit of luck too.
-Yes, 100%.
And you said that yourself.
That's how it is in sports
and in anything else. -That's right.
That opportunity you mentioned:
"I have to take it."
I asked the same thing to Karabatić, Goran,
and Željko, and now I'm asking you:
What were the crossroads
where you made
the right decision that launched you?
-That's a good question.
Well, there were a few key moments.
I’d single out, for example, one instance...
America. The first time
I went to America.
I was maybe 15 and a half,
almost 16.
My father and I were supposed to go
to the biggest tournaments
in the world for that age group.
16 and 18 years old.
That means the Prince Cup,
Orange Bowl, etc.
That’s over there in Florida.
We had never been to America before,
we were coming from Serbia,
which doesn’t have
the best reputation over there,
then there’s the visa,
the issues, the approach...
I skipped many tournaments
in the junior category,
because there was no money.
We simply couldn’t travel, and that’s it.
When my father couldn’t afford it,
the club would help out a little,
the federation - barely.
There just wasn’t any money.
So for such a big venture,
the trip to America for both him and me,
he had to set aside...
I think at that time,
for the stay and the travel,
it cost around $5.000 in total.
We needed that amount just to be sure
we’d be able to stay there.
At that time, finding that kind of money
was almost impossible.
He told that story,
I won’t quote him now...
In short, he went to those
notorious loan sharks, criminals,
who were the only ones
who could lend you money
just like that, but with interest.
Then comes that well-known story.
He went and told them how
much money he needed and why.
They asked him if he was
in a hurry, and he replied:
"Yes, I’m in a hurry, we need to
leave soon because of the schedule."
"Well then, the interest is 15-20%,
but since you’re in a hurry, it’ll be 30%."
What could he do? He gritted his teeth,
reached out his hand and said:
"Alright then, let it be what it will.
I’ll find a way to get the money
and pay it back."
Those were hard times, and there are
a lot of stories from back then
that aren’t for the public.
There was some car chasing
involved and a lot more,
where he was trying to find
a way out of that trouble.
In the end, he managed
to pay everything back.
But I think, those were
really tough times.
Even though I didn’t know about it
back then, because he hid it from me.
They hid it from you.
But the reason I wanted to highlight
that moment is this...
When we pulled it off - actually,
when he managed to sort everything out
and secure it,
then we went to America.
We didn’t go to America
just for the tournaments.
I think the main reason we went
was because IMG had invited us.
IMG is the biggest management
agency in tennis,
and one of the biggest
in all of sports.
At that time, Monica Seleš was with them,
they had the best players,
and in every generation,
they picked the top talents.
Back then, we didn’t have
mobile phones,
just a number we were supposed
to call in Tampa, Florida.
We changed five planes on the way there,
and the trip took two days.
There was supposed to be a man
waiting for us there,
someone who had been
described to us.
I won’t name him,
because he’s still on the tour.
That man was supposed
to wait for the manager,
and we were supposed
to arrive in the evening.
He was supposed to take us
from the airport to Bradenton
and arrange accommodation
at the Academy.
My father didn’t know
a word of English.
I knew a little,
but it was just basic level.
The crucial thing was that
he wasn’t at the airport.
We called, but no one answered.
We had an address,
but we didn’t know if we should
go there so late
or wait until the next morning.
In the end, we didn’t go,
well, actually, we did,
but we just "kissed the door",
because everything was locked.
We ended up in a two-star motel
nearby that we found.
We just slept there and showed up
there in the morning.
They explained the situation to us
with the phrase: "That’s life."
But you didn’t keep the agreement...
"That’s life..."
That’s why my father breaks out in hives
when he hears that: "That’s life."
Because it left him with
an incredible trauma.
I’ve traveled half the world,
and you tell me: That’s life.
That really annoyed him.
At that moment, we realized
what the tennis world
was like there and what a machine it was.
In the end, we managed to arrange
a meeting with those people,
with the main managers.
One of them was Monica Seleš’s manager.
We talked to them about everything.
They promised us castles and cities,
because in the meantime,
they had seen how I played,
and I had won the Prince Cup.
When I came to the second Orange Bowl
for the under 18 category,
after winning the previous one
for under 16,
I dominated and played great.
They said I had everything,
the game and the results,
and that they would do everything...
My father said: "Alright,
all of this sounds wonderful."
He was always careful, because life
taught him not to jump in headfirst.
He wasn’t especially trusting,
thanks to that first day,
but at the second meeting,
all of it sounded good to him,
so he told me: "Son, this is great.
You’ll have money
and a place to stay,
you’ll have a base here
and a base in Europe."
I think that’s the reason
why it all fell apart.
Because they usually bring
the whole world there with them,
and you’re based there,
and entire families have to
move there as well.
Like you said, I don’t know if it’s
the same in other sports.
I assume it is,
based on conversations
with some fantastic footballers,
who were and still are.
They told me that when you come
from a small country,
they usually find you a job,
for example, in London,
a house, and so on, they provide
for your whole family
so you can be there
at the Chelsea Academy or wherever.
The family is with you, you grow up,
and have a normal childhood. -Yes.
But it’s a big step for the whole family
to move to another country
whose language they
don’t even know.
But in most cases, you go to
a "better country." Whatever that means.
I understand,
better in terms of conditions.
Economically better, because
you’ll have a higher salary,
a better house, and many other things.
-Yes. That’s normal.
But again, I say,
what was important for him
was what Niki told us,
considering that I was still with him...
Niki told us: "Alright, go ahead,
but my advice is
that you don’t have to go to them."
"Go play tournaments,
but they won’t give you anything."
My father didn’t say anything to Niki
the first time, he just looked at him,
but later he told me: "I don’t
understand why he’s saying this.
How can they not give us anything?
You’re the best in the world
in that category."
They’re supposed to give you money,
and help financially
and with management, provide knowledge,
conditions, coaches, etc.,
because we were open to all of that.
Niki said: "Yes, go ahead,
because you need that.
I can give you this here,
but for all the rest,
for travel, for the coaching staff, etc.,
for that you need someone like them."
But he added: "Knowing them
and my experience with them...
And because you’re from Serbia
and a million other things."
I was a kid and didn’t want to think
that Niki wasn’t right.
But I can see that my father
didn’t really like what Niki said.
He didn’t fully believe him
at that moment,
even though he trusted him
unconditionally in everything else.
It was as if he didn’t believe
that would happen,
but that the opposite would happen.
And after two meetings,
that’s exactly how it was.
They offered us all of that,
"castles and cities" and everything.
Niki warned us then:
"If they promise you everything,
which I doubt, say that you want
to have a base in Europe as well."
That means you have a base with them,
but when you’re in Europe
for European tournaments
for several months,
you need a European base.
You can be in Serbia, at my academy
or wherever you decide,
but you need a base from which you go
and where you have an organized life.
Which is logical, normal, and expected.
When we asked for that, they said
there was no problem
and it made sense.
They said they would get back to us
in a few days after we returned.
They never got back to us.
-Never? -They never got back.
Even to this day, when we see them,
because I see them at tournaments,
I greet them and so on.
That’s the world where things
happen and unfold that way.
We realized that we came
from a different mentality.
I’m speaking generally.
I’m not claiming that everyone
from this region is like that.
But generally, we are like that,
all the people from the countries
of the former Yugoslavia.
Our word means more than paper,
and that has value.
When you tell someone something,
make a promise, shake hands,
look them in the eye and say it’s so,
and then stab them in the back...
We can’t understand that.
We couldn’t understand it
for a long time.
Because of that, my father suffered a lot,
because he couldn’t understand
why it was like that.
But for them, it seems,
that’s everyday life - that’s normal.
Unless you put something on paper,
then it’s something else.
But you know that yourself,
you spent so many years there.
Yes, for them, it’s all business,
nothing personal.
And for us, it’s all personal,
and nothing business...
Aren’t you ashamed
of your parents and everything?
And it’s good that it’s that way.
I somehow grew up
with that kind of value system -
to see a person as a person.
You and I, for example,
do some business, whatever it is.
You have a project, or we’re working
on something in sports, whatever.
And that’s all fine.
We’ll put some things on paper,
protect you, protect me, our business,
and organize it all properly.
But you and I - if we don’t understand
each other in terms of values, meaning,
if we can’t, how should I say,
cohesively understand each other as people...
And that’s different in the West.
-Over there, it’s all competition.
Alright. Let’s get back to tennis a bit.
So, the jump from juniors to seniors
happened. This interests me...
Your first big tournament was
Australia 2008, right?
After that, you said
that in the next two years
you established yourself as third,
but couldn’t find a way
to win the important matches
against Federer and Nadal.
And you emphasize winning
the Davis Cup in 2010
as the moment that
made that possible. - Yes.
Was that the end of some maturing process,
or did you need that one push,
that achievement to convince yourself
and say: "I can do this"?
I think it’s the latter.
I needed that springboard.
Because in 2007, I won Miami,
I won Montreal,
and those are big tournaments -
the biggest after the Grand Slams.
And there, I already felt
that I belonged at the top.
I was already third in the world then,
behind those two.
And then came the first Grand Slam -
the Australian Open -
and somehow there,
as a twenty-year-old, young,
I won the Grand Slam
and wrote my name in golden letters
in the history of our sport.
Because as a Grand Slam winner,
you are, in a way, immortal.
But that didn’t satisfy me -
it wasn’t enough.
First of all, I wanted Wimbledon,
because that was the dream tournament,
the one I dreamed about,
the one that motivated me as a kid.
And I also wanted to dominate
over Federer and Nadal.
Because those two were
so dominant,
and the contrast in their
playing styles and personalities
made a perfect Hollywood story.
-Yes. -Their rivalry.
And then I showed up.
"What are you doing here?
There’s no room for a third."
You come from Serbia - skinny,
small - and you’re also arrogant,
saying you can be No. 1. -Yes.
-And then when I won that,
I broke the ice, but then I felt
what everyone feels
when they win their
first Grand Slam,
without knowing
what that feeling really means.
And that’s what it means to be
a Grand Slam winner -
or the defending Grand Slam champion -
for the first time.
It brings a lot of beautiful things.
As I said, it’s a relief,
you’ve dreamed about it your whole life...
But suddenly, all eyes are on you,
and suddenly,
you are one of the main favorites
wherever you play, whatever you do.
Then begins the creation
of a certain kind of pressure -
a type of pressure
you haven’t faced before.
I did have those pressures
we talked about,
but this was something new.
Suddenly, I’m no longer just attacking -
now I’m also defending.
Before, I was just attacking,
winning, climbing.
Now the expectations are...
If he doesn’t win the title, it’s a failure.
You get a bit defensive.
You tighten up.
I didn't win a Grand Slam
for three years until 2011.
The second one was that Australian
Open, I think it was in 2010.
I changed my racket that year.
I had an injury.
And I was searching for myself...
I changed some team members.
My serve mechanics were off.
Searching, what, how,
this and that...
I went through a lot of difficulties.
Really, I didn't feel myself.
I wasn’t grounded.
-And you needed that.
I was still ranked third, though.
I still had a great career
and good results,
but for the expectations
and visions I wanted,
there was something missing.
And during those three years,
I was losing big matches,
until the moment
I changed my habits,
my diet and the way I recovered.
I felt I had more strength
and I solved problems
with allergies and breathing.
That was causing me
a lot of trouble on the court.
But the biggest turning point
was winning the Davis Cup,
here in Belgrade,
in front of a full arena.
It was magnificent.
That's probably something
you only experience once,
and it wasn’t just for me...
That was for Janko, Viktor, Nenad,
for all of us on the national team.
That was a huge boost.
We continued to have
our best seasons after.
In 2011, I probably had
my best season ever. 43 wins...
For half a year,
I didn’t lose a single match.
I won three Grand Slams, etc.
So that was definitely a springboard.
When you talked about it,
it made you smile. Goran told me that.
So, out of your three most
meaningful achievements,
two were with national team.
One was Wimbledon,
a dream for most tennis players,
the Davis Cup
and the Olympics in 2024.
Goran told me that your motivation
to play for the national team
is a million times greater
than for individual events.
That’s true for all of us,
but I think in your sport
it’s a bit more noticeable,
because in football we have
someone like Vidić or Modrić.
Modrić played for Dinamo
and already built a reputation there.
Vidić at Red Star,
and later at Real Madrid.
You have a sense of belonging
at Manchester United.
You have your locker room,
your club, your fans,
but you don’t have that here.
There’s no club in Serbia for you.
There is a club, technically,
but no matches. -None.
There are no home matches.
-That's right.
And because of that, you feel even more
motivated to give something to the fans.
True. In football, basketball,
and team sports,
there are always some
competitions going on.
Not just because they’re team sports,
but also for the national team.
You have your audience,
not club-based, but national team.
Especially now that
they’ve extended the season:
Nations League, then World Cup
and European qualifiers.
Every year there's something.
There’s always some gathering.
It’s nice to see that,
but I’m also a bit envious when
they meet every month or two.
They all show up in their tracksuits,
hang out together during
the training camp,
they play one or two matches
in front of their home crowd.
That’s truly a great feeling.
I miss playing more
in my own country.
I feel that connection,
not just with the people of Serbia,
but also with the people from
the other countries of Yugoslavia.
Somehow, I feel love
and that sense of belonging,
a desire and passion
to perform in front of them.
I’d love to do that,
but I don’t have the opportunity.
One of the things I’d love to do,
if there’s no official tournament,
is to organize one. I’ve even
spoken with Čila about it.
At one point, during COVID,
the Adria Tour had the idea
to organize a kind of
exhibition tournament,
in the countries of former Yugoslavia.
To play and promote the sport
for humanitarian purposes.
That’s beautiful.
We really enjoy doing that.
But it’s hard to align the schedule,
but we will do it one day.
Yes, in our sport, that feeling is
even stronger, for all these reasons,
but we rarely have the chance.
You mentioned the Olympics?
The Olympics really are
my greatest achievement.
When I think about it,
it depends on the perspective.
I see it from the strength of emotion.
To me, that’s everything in life.
You can talk about achievements,
tournaments, goals,
but when you say something,
it makes your emotions tremble,
you tremble, that’s it.
Do you understand me?
When I mention the Olympics
that was last year,
my hands start to sweat and I shake.
I also trembled during the defeats
that I had at the Olympics.
Because those were the biggest
losses of my career,
the most painful, the most emotional.
-Is that why your Olympic career... -Yes.
You’ve won everything, but it was
turbulent. -Yes. -Since 2008.
I had to wait five Olympics
for that moment.
Isn’t that an enormous pressure
knowing you want to do it,
and knowing how rare the chance is?
You don’t wait a year or a few months,
you wait four years for the next one.
What kind of desire is that?
And you said that after
all those turbulent moments,
you changed something after Rio?
Your approach to Tokyo? -Yes.
What can you change?
I was very close to that
medal in Tokyo.
At that time, I was maybe having
the second-best season of my career.
Maybe even the best, 2021.
That was during COVID,
and the matches were played
without spectators, remember?
The entire Olympic experience
wasn't the usual one.
But still, it was the Olympics.
Even if you're playing in front
of empty stands, it's your sport.
And people from different countries
are watching you. It still holds meaning.
In Beijing, during my first Olympics,
I won the bronze medal.
I had a very close match with Nadal,
which I lost and then I won the bronze.
In London, I made it
to the semifinals as well.
I’ve always played well at the Olympics.
But I just couldn’t get past
the semifinals.
And it’s really interesting
how all that played out.
In 2012, I played against
Andy Murray at Wimbledon.
I lost a very tight match in two sets.
I had so many chances.
If I could go back,
I’d replay those matches.
And again, I lost to Del Potro
on another court.
Same thing, interruptions,
rain, and so on...
but I had already won bronze
and was fighting for it again.
I wanted to win,
but I was emotionally drained
from the loss the day before
and it was really hard to get going.
I experienced that twice:
in London and in Tokyo.
In Rio, I was probably
at the absolute peak of my career.
I had, for a year and a half,
the best results of my life.
At that point, I had all four
Grand Slam titles in a row.
It doesn’t get better than that.
I came to Rio four days early.
The conditions I trained in were
perfect, thank God. Ideal for me.
Bounce, balls, speed, air,
everything was perfect.
I was training fantastically.
Playing those practice matches,
crushing everyone left and right.
Then comes the day before the match.
I’m playing singles, and I’m
also preparing for doubles,
because I was playing
doubles with Zimonjić.
I play that singles practice
match for two hours.
And I think I'll do two more
hours of doubles. So I play that too.
I finish, and then my wrist
starts to hurt.
I think it’s just from overuse
and the balls. Just a little fatigue.
Then the physio takes a look at it.
Next morning, I wake up
and I can’t move my wrist.
One day before the match.
What do I do? Shock!
I get injections and every possible
pill. And I go out and play.
But it wasn’t right.
I couldn’t do my backhand.
I played an okay match,
and I don’t want to take anything away
from Del Potro, who beat me
in the first round.
I had a very tough draw, and he ended up
winning the silver for Argentina.
But for me, that might be
the most painful loss.
Given the moment I was in,
and how everything was unfolding...
Then we move forward five years.
2021, Tokyo.
I changed my approach. I didn’t
stay in the Olympic Village.
One of the things that fascinates me
is that I always wanted to attend
the opening ceremony of Olympic Games.
But those ceremonies involve standing
for five to six hours, waiting...
And we would usually play the next day,
on day one of the Olympic Games.
So it didn’t make much sense. You need
rested legs, your body, your spine.
And even though it was tough
for me, I said, I’ll skip it.
There’s no audience, so it’ll be
easier to miss it in Tokyo.
Honestly, it was worth it,
in that sense. I slept in a hotel.
I went to the village during the day.
My brother Marko was with me
at the Olympics.
I didn’t lose a set, not even three games
per set, until the semifinal.
I was playing amazing tennis.
In the semifinal against Zverev.
I’m leading 6-1, 3-2, and serving.
But for two days I’d been feeling
I had minimal reserves of energy.
Minimal. I was praying just
to make it to the final.
Because if I win, I get a rest day,
since we were playing every day.
That day of rest would have
given me time to recover.
And to have enough energy
to win the gold.
He started playing well, and I retired
and began to doubt myself.
I lost the second set, then the third,
and that was it. I had no strength left.
It was really painful.
As painful as it was,
it took me longer to get over it
than other losses, because I felt like
it wasn’t the end.
I still had Paris ahead of me,
even though I was in my thirties.
I take care of my body
and I’m mentally strong.
Paris is ahead of me, I’ll be ready.
Now, to return to the first question...
Balance, optimal goals...
The only thing I currently
have in my vision...
It’s interesting, when we talk about
those achievements and the Olympics,
which stands out alongside
the Davis Cup,
what gives me motivation is the 2028
Olympics in Los Angeles,
and playing for my country.
And yes, the Grand Prix
and Grand Slam tournaments,
but not even they motivate me
as much as the Olympics.
How I see it... -Even though
you’ve now won in Paris?
I just want to be at the Olympics,
to be an Olympian.
To experience that moment,
wearing my country’s crest,
walking through the Olympic Village
with the world’s best athletes.
That feeling is sport itself.
Anyone who hasn’t experienced it
can’t fully understand it.
But for athletes, who’ve had the privilege
to experience it, it’s unique.
Historically, the Olympics weren’t
tied to football or tennis.
It was athletics, gymnastics, swimming,
those are the Olympic sports.
Or water polo and basketball.
But tennis wasn’t always
connected to the Olympics.
Still, you can’t help but feel
the full magic of the Olympics.
For me, it’s mainly about
the Olympic Village.
Besides representing your country
and being in a completely
different atmosphere.
Even though we play tournaments and
the Olympics was held at Roland Garros,
these are completely different people,
a different organization,
everything is different.
Even the balls are different.
Everyone has their own protocols...
-And it’s best-of-three sets?
Athletes from your country come
to watch you.
And when you walk through
that Olympic Village see
those 10,000-15,000 athletes
from all over the world those athletes,
as you said, the original Olympic sports,
who’ve been preparing
for four years just for this...
We have the privilege in our sports
to play important events every year.
But they wait and train
specifically for this.
In their eyes you can see the hunger,
the spark, how happy they are to be there.
How inspired and motivated they are.
You go into the gym and work out
with them and when you watch them,
you feel like you could carry the whole
world on your shoulders.
Those are the things that, for me...
That have always remained
my biggest motivation.
The Olympics and the national team.
It’s incredible how you speak,
we could talk like this for days.
That concludes the first part
of the interview with Novak Đoković.
Watch part two on Arena Sport
in two weeks. Goodbye!